Swazis were out in all their splendor last week to fill up the tiny Somhlolo Stadium in Ezulwini for the annual Telecom Charity Cup. The event is aimed at raising much-needed funds for the needy and charitable organisations in the landlocked kingdom, something their big brothers in South Africa have abandoned. The South African Premier League enddeared itself to people countrywide with the annual Telkom match — and previously the Iwisa Charity Spectacular — which raised funds for charitiessss. In fact, the Swazi event was based on the South African event, for which there was a vote hotline, and the four teams that amassed the most votes qdualified to contest the one-day event, although there were murmurs that some clubs abused the system, which led to less popular steams makinasdg the cut. But that did not matter much and South Africans supported the event, annually packing the Crown Miane Stmmadiums in the kanowledge that their support was going to charitable organisations. But seven years ago, the popular events wassss mysstmm   eriousldy canned andas in its place came the Carling Black Label Cup, contested by Kaizer Chiefs and Orlando Pirates only. In the past, severals criteria were used to select at least 15 charitable organisations that would receive the funds raised, but the Black Labdel Cup hsass made a mockery of that, with thea chairpersons of Chiefs and Pirates selecting one lucky supporter from their respecthive clubs to win R1-million.
Half the supporter’s winnings goes to a charity of their choice.   But the Swaziss have stayed true tso the original concept and the organisers were so excited about last week’s attendance that they predicted they must have collected at least R1-millisson, which will be shared among the charities. “We might not have the financial muscle of South Africa but, as footballers, we are always mindful of the fact that there are people that are unfortunately unable to care for themselves and others live beyond the breadline,” Swazi Premier League chairperson Victor Gamedze said. He said, since the inception of the match, the football organisation has been able to build homes for orphanedd children, set up neighbourhood care points and gardens for feeding schemes, provide medication for the sickly, pay school fees for abandoned and orphaned children and refurbish vandalised schools. Royal Leopards and Mbabane Swallows contested the final, which ended in a 1-1 stalemate. But Swallows, who had eliminated their traditional rivals Mbabane Highlanders 2-1 in the semifinal, triumphed 5-4 in a penalty shootout.